<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>A Spring Harvest</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="two-legends" epub:type="part">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Two Legends</h2>
			<article id="glastonbury" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Glastonbury</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thither through moaning woods came Bedivere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At gloomy breaking of a winter’s day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weary and travel-stained and sick at heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a great wound gotten in that last fray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere he stood by, and watched the King depart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down the long, silent reaches of the mere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the earth was sad, and skies were drear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the wind cried, and chased the relict leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like ships, that the storm-tossed ocean batters and heaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they fly before the gale, and the mariners fear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So he found at the last an hermitage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hard by a little hill, and sheltering trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That bent gaunt branches in the winter’s breeze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he drew rein, and leant, and struck the door:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then presently came forth an hermit sage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And helped him to dismount with labour sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straight went they in, but Bedivere being lame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stumbled against the open door, and swooned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And would have fallen, but the hermit caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And laid him gently down; then hurrying brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From a great chest a cordial, and came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he might drink, and so beheld his wound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long time lay Bedivere betwixt life and death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a torn traveller on a stormy height</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twixt one wind and another: till his breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came easier, and he prospered. Then did sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bathe him in soothing waters, soft and deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And left him whole, at breaking of the light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So he beheld the old man, and desired</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he would tell of whom he was, and whence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereat once more the ancient eyes were fired:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I, I was Arthur’s bishop, at his court</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his church I ministered, and thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When at the last the whole was overthrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wrath and ill designings, straight I sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A place where I might die, too feeble grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To endure a new beginning to my years</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When once the past was lost, and whelmed in tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hither I came, where, in the dawns of time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dim peoples, that the very stones forget,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lived, loved, and fought, and wove the riddling rime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On a lake island mystically set.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They passed, and after ages manifold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came wandering sainted Joseph (even he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That tended God’s frail body, and enrolled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In linen clothes of spicèd fragrancy).</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He brought the vessel, vanished now from earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wrought destruction to the Table Round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since many deemed themselves above their worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sought in vain, and perished ere they found.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then Bedivere: “Alas the King! I saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The unstayed overwhelming tide of war:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the opposèd standards were unfurled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Arthur and of Mordred, his base son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere yet the noise of battle was begun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard the heralds crying to the world:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Ye that have sought out pallid harmonies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where never wind blows, save the gentle south:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye that have trafficked on the sounding seas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fear nor cheerless rains, nor scorching drouth:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Ye that have piled the rich, full-ripened crops</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of word and measure, till the rime, grown proud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did straight contemn the leaping mountain tops</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lose itself in air, and riven cloud:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Ye that have lived a dangerous life of war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose speech has been bold words and heady boasts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gather, for strife and death unknown before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come gather all unto the fronting hosts.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I saw the last dim battle in the mist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, where a dreary waste of barren sand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth mark the ultimate leagues of this fair land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce we beheld the foe we struck, or wist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which party had advantage: like thin wraiths</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit to throng Lethe banks the warriors</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Struck and o’ercame, or fell, unseen, unwept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And alien hopes, lives, peoples, alien faiths</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were all confounded on those desolate shores.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever the mist seethed, and the waves kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hollow chanting, as they mourned the end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all mankind, and of created time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many fell therein of foe or friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know not, save that when the darkness came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the mist cleared, I found at last the King,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His armour and visage fouled with blood and slime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fading in his eyes the ancient flame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I saw him make on Mordred with his spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crying ‘Tide me death, betide me life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shall not live, that wrought the accursed thing,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put a dread ending to the outworn strife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw them fall together, and, drawn near.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knew that the King was wounded unto death.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then as he drew with growing pain his breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I looked, and saw a long, black barge that stole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across the waters, like a wandering soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Returnèd from the woeful realm, to view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ancient haunts well-loved that once it knew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when it touched the shallows I did bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dying Arthur as he bade, and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I placed him ’mid dark forms: I could not tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose they might be; and wept, and breathed farewell.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then spake the eremite: “Beyond yon door</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There stands a chapel, ancient and weatherworn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there did worship in the days of yore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sons of kings. The night ere you came hither</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was awakened by the sound of feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I looked forth, and saw a body borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By veilèd figures straight, as they knew whither,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In at the chapel gateway. I went down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And found that they had digged a grave, most meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one of saintly life, or king by birth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They seemed some score, and by blown candles’ light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw that each with tears bedewed his gown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere sank the corse into the waiting earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then prayed, and so went out into the night.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereon the twain arose, and went straightway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward the old, dim chapel, and beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stone beneath whose length the body lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kneeling they closely scanned it all, and spelled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Graven in golden character, “Arcturus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rex Quondamque Futurus.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Quoth Bedivere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thank God this voice remaineth unto us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I do mind me of a prophecy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spoken long since in some emblazoned year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How Arthur should escape mortality</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lie beneath the hills, in cavern deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or on some shore, where faery seas do break:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around him all his warriors shall sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who at a great bell’s sounding shall awake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What time th’ old enemy spreads death and harm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thorough his ancient realm, and the last woes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go over her; his own victorious arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall rid the stricken land of hate and foes.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So leave we them, each head inaureoled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the awakening spring’s young sunlight-gold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, on an evening, hurrying footsteps rung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without the door, and straight ’twas open flung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They saw who stood therein, and each one knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The face unspared by years and strife and shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pale as the moon is pale on winter nights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With deep eyes dreaming like September haze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or lit with lust of battle, eyes that few</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had looked on and forgot; in such wise came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lancelot, the hero of immortal fights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lancelot, the golden knight of golden days.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Whence cam’st thou, Lancelot?” “Even from the</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Queen that was, whom now a convent’s shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imprisons, and a dark and tristful veil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enwraps those brows, that in old days were seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most puissant proud of all that ever made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The traitor honest, and the valorous frail.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet evermore about her form there clings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And evermore shall cling, the ancient grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like evening sunlight lingering on the mere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And till the end of all created things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There shall be some one found, shall strive to trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The immortal loveliness of Guinevere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Shall I not mind me of old ecstasies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Camelot, beneath the ancient walls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In shady paths, and marble terraces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rose-fragrant, where eternal sunlight falls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ah! the last long kiss is ta’en and given,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the last look in those unfathomed eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The passionate last embrace is coldly riven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all is grief, beneath the pitiless skies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Gods of the burnt-out hearth, the wandered wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gods of pale dawns that vanished long ago,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gods of the barren tree, the withered leaf.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The faded flower, and the ungarnered sheaf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gods half-forgot in the wild ages’ flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yours, yours am I, that all for nought have sinned.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Spring, summer passed away, and autumn rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swelled the lean brooks, until the gelid year</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shot forth its icy hand, and grasped again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again the hanging clouds were struck and furled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By winds of winter, until skies were clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there was frost o’ nights, and all the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay glistening to the newly risen sun.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till came that season, wherein solemn days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do celebrate the reign on earth begun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the most blessèd Child, whenas all ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were bound, and all the fields were white with snow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then in the chapel at high noon they three</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Offered their quiet orisons and so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came forth and looked upon the purity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he saw the fields all stainless-white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lancelot groaned in spirit, and spake: “How sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no wise joyous to a sinner’s sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is this dear land, where the snow lies untrod.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even so once before the eyes of God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul lay all unspotted; now no more.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Courage, my son, and patience,” quoth the sage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sin there is, that shall not lose its stain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the great love of God, and His dear Son.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repent and be forgiven: know that none</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall sue before His throne, and sue in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor shall one name be blotted from the page</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he that bears it turn to prayer and tears.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then Lancelot: “Though through the tale of years</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That still are left before the longed-for earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receive my body, I should strive amain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To slay myself, and gain regenerate birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas it were all profitless and vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Verily, when I came unto this place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I railed on God, that I had lost my soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nothing gained: until a heavenly grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enwrapped me, like some sick man made half whole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now my grief is only for old sin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ah, what boots it? Lo, this barren tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(He touched a shrub that grew beside the door),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This tree, methinks, shall bud and blossom before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pass the gates divine, and enter in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the fair country I must never see.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But even as he spoke, the hand of God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worked on the sombre branches, and straightway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were all green with sap, and bud, and leaf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As at the very bidding of the spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burst forth, and soon each tender branch was gay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With flowers that nodded in the winter’s breeze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(So blossomed in old time the prophet’s rod),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Lancelot stood and saw the wondrous thing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then softly spake the hermit, “Now is grief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reproved, and sorrow cast out with the lees;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For God beholds the living, not the dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And He that took the semblance of a child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loves He but penance, and the drooping head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has He not sung for joy, has He not smiled?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So they grew old together, and the years</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pressed no more to their lips the cup of tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(They had drained all, maybe). And ever less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seemed all things mortal, as in quietness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They pondered the eternal mysteries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(The noblest heritage of all men born),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as are writ upon the face of dawn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in the glamour of a moonlit night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in the autumn swallow’s southern flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in the breaking of the restless seas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or dreamed rich, hallowed dreams of aureate days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While yet the King was young, and sunlight fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On bower and roof of ancient Camelot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of triumph clarion, and thanksgiving bell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When all was song, and laughter, and high praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even when as yet the accursed thing was not.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then would loom out from the chill mists of time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The faces and the forms remembered still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The King and Guinevere, and Galahad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That rode upon a peerless quest and dire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kay, swift and hasty as a flame of fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gentle Percival, whom to give made glad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Merlin, contriver of the riddling rime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Gawain, silent harbinger of ill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So as the day draws ever toward the dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever toward peace the great wind’s sounding breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever toward the further shore the bark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They drew to the dark, silent realm of death.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Far, far away from their old palace-halls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where once they lived a splendid life and vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That now are scattered stones and crumbled walls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In some soft vale, or by the echoing main,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Beneath the springing grass, and very deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They three do lie, where never mornings rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ope the portals of their dazèd eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor ever mortal footstep breaks their sleep,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And near beside lies Arthur, even he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was King once, and yet again shall be.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="legend" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Legend</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Grey, ancient abbeys, you may see them yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that high plain above the western sea:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A broken arch or two, a few worn stones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Piled one upon another, and for paving</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uneven fragments with tall grass between:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grass that is always green, winter and summer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The grass that grows on long-forgotten graves.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was a springtime morning long ago,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A morning of blue skies and whitest clouds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And singing birds, and singing streams, and woods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shone like silver, yet untouched with green:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brethren of an abbey of the plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Whereof what now is ruin yet was whole⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were labouring as holy brethren must,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quietly, and in peace: and elder ones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paced in the cloister, and some, older still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too old to work or dream, sat in the sunlight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sunlight which they soon should see no more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And there came from the wood upon the hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One clothed in the sere habit of a monk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That passed in at the portal of the abbey:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brighter his face than is the face of spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And joy was in his tread, as in his soul.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And some that paced the cloister paused to glance at him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one that went upon an errand stayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some that laboured left their work, and came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gathering round him, and he spake, and said:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Very fair the golden morning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in yonder wood I strayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I heard diviner music</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the greatest harpers made,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For a sweet bird sang before me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Songs of laughter, and of tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that I have loved and longed for,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I measured out my years.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sang of blessed shores and golden</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the old, dim heroes be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distant isles of sunset glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Set beyond the western sea.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sang of Christ and Mary Mother</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hearkening unto angels seven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Playing on their golden harp-strings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the far courts of high Heaven.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So they stood by, and listened to his speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rhythmic, for that great joy was in his soul:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But while they wondered whence he was, and who,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cast his eyes around, and, shuddering, cried:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Who are ye, that I thought to be my brothers?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strangers and sons of strangers! Where are they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I left behind me but an hour ago?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then was there whispering among the throng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wonder not a little, and some scorn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he that spake, with anguish in his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cried: “Take me to a cell, that I may pray.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas done, and in the golden afternoon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A brother entered, and found none within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only a sere monk’s habit, and much dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As of a body crumbled in the grave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And while they wondered what these things might be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last spake forth the oldest of them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burdened with hundred winters in his soul:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I can remember, when my years were young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hearing the old monks say, one went from here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When spring was on the earth, as it is now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some five-score years ago, and was not seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again, though search was made in all the land.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And some believed this was the same, and all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgot it in a sennight’s silent toil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save one, that saw, and seeing understood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for the greater glory of High God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrote down the story in a mighty book,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And limned the old saint hearkening to the bird</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With bright hues, and you still may read and see.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</section>
		<section id="first-poems" epub:type="part">
			<h2 epub:type="title">First Poems</h2>
			<article id="rime" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Rime</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O scholar grey, with quiet eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reading the charactered pages, bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With one tall candle’s flickering light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a turret chamber under the skies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O scholar, learned in gramarye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have you seen the manifold things I see?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Have you seen the forms of tracèd towers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence clamorous voices challenge the hours:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gaunt tree-branches, pitchy black</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the long, wind-driven wrack</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of scurrying, shuddering clouds, that race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever across the pale moon’s face?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Have you heard the tramp of hurrying feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There beneath, in the shadowy street,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have you heard sharp cries, and seen the flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of silvery steel, in a perilous game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A perilous game for men to play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hid from the searching eyes of day?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Have you heard the great awakening breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like trump that summons the saints from death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the wild, majestical wind, which blows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loud and splendid, that each man knows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far, O far away is the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breaking, murmuring, stark and free?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All these things I hear and see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, a scholar of gramarye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All are writ in the ancient books</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clear, exactly, and he that looks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Finds the night and the changing sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The years gone by, and the years to be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(He that searches, with tireless eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a turret-chamber under the skies)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passion and joy, and sorrow and laughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life and death, and the things thereafter.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-an-elzevir-cicero" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To an Elzevir Cicero</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Dust-covered book, that very few men know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as very few men understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The glory of an ancient, storied land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the wild current of the ages’ flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have not old scholars, centuries ago</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caressed you in the hollow of their hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The while with quiet, kindly eyes they scanned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your pages, yellowed now, then white as snow?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A voice there is, cries through your every word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of him, that after greatest glory came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down the grey road to darkness and to tears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A voice like far seas in still valleys heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crying of love and death and hope and fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That change not with the changing of the years.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-a-durer-drawing-of-antwerp-harbour" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To a Dürer Drawing of Antwerp Harbour</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Figured by Dürer’s magic hand wast thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, lightning-like, traced on the lucid page</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rough, careless lines, with wizardry so sage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That yet the whole was fair, I know not how:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ships of gaunt masts, and stark, sea-smitten prow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Idle, yet soon again to sweep the main</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the swift service of old merchants’ gain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where are ye now, alas, where are ye now?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gone are ye all, and vanished very long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sunk with great glory in the storied wars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or conquered by the leaping breakers wild:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet we love your image, like some song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That tells of ancient days and high, because</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Old Dürer looked upon you once and smiled.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="pure-virginia" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Pure Virginia</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="subtitle">York River Returns</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Like smoke that vanishes on the morning breeze</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are passed the first beginnings of the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When time was even as a bud still curled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scarce the limit set of lands and seas;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like smoke, like smoke the composite auguries</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Hebrew and of Hellene are all furled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fulfilled or else forgot, and idly hurled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This way or that way, as the great winds please:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, and like smoke of this delicious herb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brought by strange ways the curious mind may guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">From where the parrot and the leopard be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My thoughts, that should be strong, the years to curb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Go up, and vanish into nothingness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">On a blue cloud of exquisite fragrancy.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-preface-for-a-tale-i-have-never-told" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Preface for a Tale I Have Never Told</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Herein is nought of windy citadels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where proud kings dwell, that with an iron hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deal war or justice: here no history</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of valiant ships upon the wine-dark seas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passing strange lands and threading channels strait</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between embalmed islands: here no song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That men shall sing in battle and remember</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they are old and grey beside the fire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only a story gathered from the hills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the wind crying of forgotten days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A story that shall whisper, “All things change⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For friends do grow indifferent, and loves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Die like a dream at morning: bitterness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is the sure heritage of all men born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he alone sees truly, who looks out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From some huge aery peak, considering not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fast-walled cities, or the works of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But turns his gaze unto the mountain-tops</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the unfathomable blue of heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That only change not with the changing years”⁠⸺⁠</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tale that shod itself with ancient shoon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wrapped its cloak, and wandered from the west.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-sonnet" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Sonnet</h3>
				<p>
					<span>There is a wind that takes the heart of a man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fresh wind in the latter days of spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When hate and war and every evil thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the wide arches of high Heaven span</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seems dust, and less to be accounted than</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The omened touches of a passing wing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Destiny, that calls himself a king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goes all forgotten for the song of Pan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For why? Because the twittering of birds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is the best music that was ever sung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the voice of trees finds better words</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than ever poet from his heartstrings wrung:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because all wisdom and all gramarye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are writ in fields, O very plain to see.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="it-was-all-in-the-black-countree" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">“It Was All in the Black Countree”</h3>
				<p>
					<span>It was all in the Black Countree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What time the sweet o’ the year should be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw a tree, all gaunt and grey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As mindful of a winter’s day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that a lonely bird did sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the topmost branch of it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who to my thought did sweeter sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than any minstrel of a king.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-a-pianist" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To a Pianist</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When others’ fingers touch the keys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then most doleful threnodies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chase about the air, and run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Pandæmonium begun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rhythm strained and false accord</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a ceaseless stream are poured;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then sighs are heard, and men depart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To seek the sage physician’s art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or silence, and a little ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When others’ fingers touch the keys.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When your fingers touch the keys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hark, soft sounds of summer seas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a melody most fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whisper through the pleasant air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a winding mountain stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glitters to the pale moonbeam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a breeze doth stir the tops</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of springtime larches in a copse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the winds are loosed and hurled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the wonder-stricken world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With immortal harmonies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When your fingers touch the keys.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-fragment" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Fragment</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And some came down in a great wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under grey scurrying skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To where the long wave-beaten shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ever shrieks and cries.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O, fling aside your toil, your care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When one cries of the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the great waves that foam and toss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the white clouds that flee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us forget our weariness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forget that we have sinned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So we but sail, what matters it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If Death ride on the wind?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Storm from the sky, storm from the sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beat on them as they stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a great longing sprang in them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cross the roaring flood.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sea-poppies" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sea Poppies</h3>
				<p>
					<span>’Twixt lonely lands and desert beach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where no wind blows and no waves reach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sunken precinct here we keep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With woven wiles of endless sleep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our twisted stems of sere-hued green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our pallid blooms what sun has seen?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he that tastes our magic breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall sleep that sleep whose name is death.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wild clouds are scurrying overhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wild wind’s voice is loud and dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sounding the knell of the dying day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet here is silence and gloom alway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a great longing seizes me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To burst my bondage and be free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To look on winds’ and waters’ strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And breathe in my nostrils the breath of life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me not dim and slumbrous ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sounding storm and labouring seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not peaceful and untroubled years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But toil and warfare and passion and tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I would fall in valorous fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lie on lofty far-seen height.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet how to burst these prison-bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forged by unseen spirit-hands?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O seek not to burst our prison bands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forged by unseen spirit-hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clashing battle and labouring sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These be for others, not for thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou lover of storm and passion and war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Break’st our charmed circle never more.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="o-sing-me-a-song-of-the-wild-west-wind" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">O, Sing Me a Song of the Wild West Wind</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O, sing me a song of the wild west wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his great sea-harrying flail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hardy mariners, copper skinned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fly with a bursting sail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They see the clouds of crispèd white</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shadow the distant hills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And filled are they with a strange delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As shaking away old ills.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O, give me a boat that is sure and stark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And swift as a slinger’s stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a sail of canvas bronzèd dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I will go out alone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor fear nor sorrow my soul shall keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When around me lies the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I will return with the night, and sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the wind’s wild harmony.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="aere-perennius" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Ære Perennius</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Written on Commemoration Sunday, Corpus Christi College, Oxford</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>We praise, we praise the immortal dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who strove beneath unheeding skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For truth that raised the drooping head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For light that gladdened weary eyes:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The martyr’s cross, the warrior’s sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How should they be of lesser worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than some unprofitable hoard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In ancient mines below the earth?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The song that one alone has sung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The great uncompromising page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are these but glittering baubles, flung</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the world from age to age?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But ruin’d columns, wondrous tall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Built in old time with labour sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mighty deeds done once for all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The voice heard once, and heard no more?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Rather they shine as doth the star</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the close of winter’s day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That cheers the traveller afar</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And draws him on, and points the way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We praise, we praise the immortal dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do they not verily wait till we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the spoilt years unharvested</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be also of their company?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-old-kings" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Old Kings</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Far away from sunny rills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far away from golden broom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far away from any town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither merchants travel down⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a hollow of the hills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In impenetrable gloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sit the old forgotten kings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto whom no poet sings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto whom none makes bequest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto whom no kingdoms rest,⁠⸺⁠</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only wayward shreds of dreams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sound of ancient streams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the shock of ancient strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the further shore of life.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When our days are done, shall we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enter their pale company?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="o-there-be-kings-whose-treasuries" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">O There Be Kings Whose Treasuries</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O there be kings whose treasuries</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are rich with pearls and gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And silks and bales of cramasy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spices manifold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gardens they have with marble stairs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And streams than life more fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With roses set and lavender</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That do enchant the air.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O there be many ships that sail</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sea-ways wide and blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there be master-mariners</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sail them straight and true:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there be many women fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who watch out anxiously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And are enamoured of the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their dear ones come from sea:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But riches I can find enow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All in a barren land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where sombre lakes shine wondrously</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With rocks on either hand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I can find enow of love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up there, alone, alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With none beside me save the wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor speech except his moan.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For there far up among the hills</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The great storms come and go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a most proud processional</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of cloud and rain and snow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There light and darkness only are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A changing benison</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the old gods who wrought the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shaped the moon and sun.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-study" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Study</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In chamber hung with white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lit by the dawning light,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon a slender bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She lies, as she were dead:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Most carven-ivory fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And palely gold her hair.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lo, the sun’s yellow ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, with the rise of day,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through quartered casement came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wake her life’s pale flame.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-eremite" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Eremite</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When the world is still in the hush of dawn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet fast sleeping are hate and scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From my grey lodging under the hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do go out, and wander at will.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of nights when the riven clouds are hurled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strife and rancour possess the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sit alone, with thoughts that are chill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In my grey lodging under the hill.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-house-of-eld" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The House of Eld</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Now the old winds are wild about the house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the old ghosts cry to me from the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a far isle set in the western sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the evening sunlight lingering there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! I am bound here, bound and fettered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dark house crumbles, and the woods decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was too fain of life, that bound me here;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Away, old long-loved ghosts, away, away!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-south-west-wind" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The South-West Wind</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The south-west wind has blown his fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vanished with departing day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The air is warm, and very still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soft as silks of far Cathay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This is a night when spirits stray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their wan limbs bear them where they will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They wring their pallid hands alway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing the lights upon the hill.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="schumann-erstes-verlust" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Schumann: Erstes Verlust</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O, dreary fall the leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The withered leaves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Complains the breeze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That still bereaves.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All silent lies the mere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silver mere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In saddest wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reflecting skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forlorn and sere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Would autumn had not claimed its own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And would the swallows had not flown.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Skies overcast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaves falling fast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she has passed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And left the woodland strown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The woodland strown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silver mere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dying year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And me alone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Skies overcast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaves falling fast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Does she that passed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dream of the woodland strown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The woodland strown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silver mere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dying year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And me alone?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="dark-boughs-against-a-golden-sky" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Dark Boughs Against a Golden Sky</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Dark boughs against a golden sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crying of the winter wind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sweet it is, for hope is high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sad it is, for we have sinned.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Perfect is nature’s every part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sunny rest, or windy strife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But never yet the perfect heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And never yet the perfect life!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dark boughs against a golden sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crying of the winter wind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the cold earth we must lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What matter then if we have sinned?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For evermore and evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall the great river onward roll:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever winding streams and poor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall lose them in the mighty whole.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="wind-of-the-darkness" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Wind of the Darkness</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Wind of the darkness, breathing round us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wind from the never-resting sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, you have loosed the cords that bound us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo, you have set our spirits free:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Free to take wings, like the sea-bird lonely</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beating hardily up the wind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fixed are his eyes on the waters only,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Never a glance for the land behind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wind of the darkness, breathing round us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wind from the never-resting sea.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was it the old gods’ voice that found us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here, where the bars of prison be?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From the far isle that neither knoweth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Change of season, nor time’s increase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where is plenty, and no man soweth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Calling to strife that shall end in peace.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="creator-spiritus" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Creator Spiritus</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The wind that scatters dying leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whirls them from the autumn tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is grateful to the ship that cleaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stately prow the scurrying sea.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Heedless about the world we play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like children in a garden close:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A postern bars the outward way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what’s beyond it no man knows:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For careless days, a life at will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little laughter, and some tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These are sufficiency to fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The early, vain, untroubled years,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till at the last the wind upheaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His unimagined strength, and we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are scattered far, like autumn leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or proudly sail, like ships at sea.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="wind-over-the-sea" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Wind Over the Sea</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Only a grey sea, and a long grey shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the grey heavens brooding over them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twilight of hopes and purposes forgot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twilight of ceaseless eld, and when was youth?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is it not lonely here, beyond the years?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Out of the gathering darkness crashes a wind from the ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rushing with league-long paces over the plain of the waters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Driving the clouds and the breakers before it in sudden commotion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who are these on the wind, riders and riderless horses?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Riders the great ones that have been and are, and those to come shall be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These are the children of might, life’s champions and history’s forces.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Might I but grasp at a bridle, and fear not to be trodden under,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swing myself into a saddle, and ride on greatly, exulting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On down the long straight road of the wind, a galloping thunder!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Only a grey sea, and a long grey shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the grey heavens brooding over them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twilight of hopes and purposes forgot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twilight of ceaseless eld, for when was youth?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is it not lonely here, beyond the years?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="songs-on-the-downs" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Songs on the Downs</h3>
				<p>
					<span>This is the road the Romans made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This track half lost in the green hills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or fading in a forest-glade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Mid violets and daffodils.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The years have fallen like dead leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unwept, uncounted, and unstayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Such as the autumn tempest thieves),</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since first this road the Romans made.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A miser lives within this house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His patron saint’s the gnawing mouse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there’s no peace upon his brows.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A many ancient trees and thin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do fold the place their shade within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And moan, as for remembered sin.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</section>
		<section id="last-poems-and-the-burial-of-sophocles" epub:type="part">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Last Poems and “The Burial of Sophocles”</h2>
			<article id="we-who-have-bowed-ourselves-to-time" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">“We Who Have Bowed Ourselves to Time”</h3>
				<p>
					<span>We who have bowed ourselves to time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now arm an uneventful rime</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With panoply of flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the long summer hours.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But now our fierce and warlike Muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth soft companionship refuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And we must mount and ride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a steed untried.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We who have led by gradual ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our placid life to sterner days</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for old quiet things</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have set the strife of kings,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who battled have with bloody hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through evil times in barren lands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the voice of guns</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speaks and no longer stuns,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Calm, though with death encompassèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That watch the hours go overhead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knowing too well we must</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all men come to dust.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Crave of our masters’ clemency</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silence a little space that we</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon their ear may force</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tales of our trodden course.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="anglia-valida-in-senectute" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Anglia Valida in Senectute</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="subtitle">(On the Declaration of War)</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Not like to those who find untrodden ways;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But down the weary paths we know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through every change of sky and change of days</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Silent, processional we go.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not unto us the soft, unlaboured breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of children’s hopes and children’s fears:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We are not sworn to battle to the death</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the wrongs of all the years:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We are old, we are old, and worn and school’d with ills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Maybe our road is almost done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maybe we are drawn near unto the hills</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where rest is and the setting sun:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But yet a pride is ours that will not brook</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The taunts of fools too saucy grown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He that is rash to prove it, let him look</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He kindle not a fire unknown.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Since first we flung our gauntlet to the skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dared the high Gods’ will to bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fire that still may burn deceit and lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Burn and consume them to the end.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="dark-is-the-world-our-fathers-left-us" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">“Dark Is the World Our Fathers Left Us”</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Dark is the world our fathers left us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wearily, greyly the long years flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almost the gloom has of hope bereft us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far is the high gods’ song and low:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sombre the crests of the mountains lonely,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leafless, wind-ridden, moan the trees:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down in the valleys is twilight only,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twilight over the mourning seas:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Time was when earth was always golden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Time was when skies were always clear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spirits and souls of the heroes olden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faint are cries from the darkness, hear!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tear ye the veil of time asunder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tear the veil, ’tis the gods’ command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hear we the sun-stricken breakers thunder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the shore where the heroes stand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dark is the world our fathers left us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heavily, greyly the long years flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almost the gloom has of hope bereft us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far is the high gods’ song and low.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="awakening" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Awakening</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Gold-crested towers against the veilèd skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sere branches of the winter trees beneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a low song, and heavy-lidded eyes;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Is there aught else in all the world beside?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not time stilled and ended in this hour?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Up, and away! the belted squadrons ride!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="ave-atque-vale" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Ave Atque Vale</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In Oxford, evermore the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the uttermost verge of time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though grave-dust choke the sons of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And silence wait upon the rime,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At evening now the skies set forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Last glories of the dying year:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wind gives chase to relict leaves:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And we, we may not linger here.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A little while, and we are gone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">God knows if it be ours to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again the earliest hoar-frost white</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the long lawns of Trinity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In Merton, of the many courts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doorways good to wander through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gable and spire shall glitter white</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or tawny gold against the blue:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And still the winter sun shall smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At noonday, or at sunset hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Magdalen, girt with ancient trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath her bright immortal tower.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Though nevermore we tread the ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That our returning feet have known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past Oriel, and Christ Church gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto those dearer walls, our own.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oxford is evermore the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the uttermost verge of time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though grave-dust choke the sons of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And silence wait upon the rime.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="o-one-came-down-from-seven-hills" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">“O, One Came Down from Seven Hills”</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O, one came down from seven hills</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crossèd seven streams:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All in his hands were thyme and grass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his eyes were dreams:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He passèd by a seven fields</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With early dews all grey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And entered in the stricken town</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the break of day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O you old men that stand and talk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the market-place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is much trouble in your eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And anguish in your face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O woman in a silent room</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within a silent house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no pleasure in your voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or peace upon your brows.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O how should such as we rejoice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who weep that others die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who quake, and curse ourselves, and watch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vengeful hours go by?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O better far to fly the grief</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wounds, and never kills;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O better far to fly the town</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seek the seven hills⁠—”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I will go pray the seven gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who keep the seven hills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they do grant your city peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And easement of her ills.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay, rather pray the seven gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To launch the latest pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there be many things to do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere we see peace again.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then I’ll go praise the seven gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hymns and chauntings seven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as shall split the mountain-tops</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shrivel up blue heaven:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That there be men who mock at threats</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wag their heads at strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love home above their own hearts’ blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And honour more than life.”</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-to-the-british-navy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnet to the British Navy</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Lest force aspire to brand an alien name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the immortal empire of the free:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest fire and sword and slaughter strive to tame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This isle, was ne’er so tamed, and ne’er shall be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye guard the ocean barrier, undismayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Midst hidden perils for a brave man’s fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In iron craft that many smiths have made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With peaceful labour in the old, dead years.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a small vessel, of one Smith ill-wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I must soon venture on another deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dare, with little hope, and little thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of praise and honour and untroubled sleep:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, as each sails upon his perilous sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I pray High God He strengthen you, and me.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-last-meeting" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Last Meeting</h3>
				<p>
					<span>We who are young, and have caught the splendour of</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hunting it down the forested ways of the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do we not wear our hearts like a banner unfurled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Crowned with a chaplet of love, shod with the sandals</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of strife)?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now not a lustre of pain, nor an ocean of tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor pangs of death, nor any other thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the old tristful gods on our heads may bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can rob us of this one hour in the midst of the years.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-new-age-and-the-old" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The New Age and the Old</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Like the small source of a smooth-flowing river,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like the pale dawn of a wonderful day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comes the New Age, from High God, the good giver,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comes with the shouts of the children at play:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As an old leaf whirls faster and faster</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the sere branch that once gave it fair birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the arms of the devil, its master,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be the old age swept away from the earth!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-the-cultured" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To the Cultured</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Sons of culture, God-given,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First offspring of Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Athletic and tanned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well-built and not nervous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With your golf and your tweeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And your “noble editions,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quiet lives and few needs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Say a thousand a year</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For your earthly career)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who can’t understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discontent and seditions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May Heaven preserve us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From being like you.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What are we, what am I?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor rough creatures, whose life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is “depressing” and “grey,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is a heart-breaking strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With death and with shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And your polite laughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till⁠—the world pass away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In smoke and in flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some of us die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some live on after</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To build it anew.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="afterwards" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Afterwards</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Afterwards, when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old Gods’ hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the riven earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more is poured:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When weapons of war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are all outworn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What shall become</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the race of men?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One shall go forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the likeness of a child:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under sere skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a grey dawning:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One shall go forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the likeness of a child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And desolate places</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall spring and blossom:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One shall go forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the likeness of a child:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And men shall sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And greatly rejoice:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All men shall sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the love that is in them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he shall behold it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sing also.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="domum-redit-poeta" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Domum Redit Poeta</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O much desired from far away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And long, I hold thee once again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou undiminished treasury</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of small delights, yet nowise vain:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The cat curled on the cosy hearth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The thrushes in the garden trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The memories of younger years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The quiet voices, and the peace.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="memories" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Memories</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Shapes in the mist, it is long since I saw you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pale hands and faces, and quiet eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crowned with a garland the dead years wrought you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of remembrance that never dies:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One among you is tall and supple</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good to fight or to love beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only the stain of a deadly quarrel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only that and the years divide:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One there is with a face as honest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heart as true, as the open sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One who never betrayed a comrade⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Death stands now betwixt him and me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One I loved with a passionate longing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Born of worship and fierce despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dreamed that Heaven were only happy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If at length I should find him there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shapes in the mist, ye see me lonely,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lonely and sad in the dim firelight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How far now to the last of all battles?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Listen, the guns are loud to-night!)</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whatever comes, I will strike once surely,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Once because of an ancient tryst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once for love of your dear dead faces</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere I come unto you, Shapes in the mist.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="intercessional" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Intercessional</h3>
				<p>
					<span>There is a place where voices</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of great guns do not come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where rifle, mine, and mortar</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For evermore are dumb:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where there is only silence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And peace eternal and rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Set somewhere in the quiet isles</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond Death’s starry West.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O God, the God of battles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To us who intercede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give only strength to follow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until there’s no more need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grant us at that ending</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the unkindly quest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To come unto the quiet isles</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond Death’s starry West.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="april-1916" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">April 1916</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Now spring is come upon the hills in France,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the trees are delicately fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As heeding not the great guns’ voice, by chance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brought down the valley on a wandering air:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now day by day upon the uplands bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do gentle, toiling horses draw the plough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And birds sing often in the orchards where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spring wantons it with blossoms on her brow⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye! but there is no peace in England now.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O little isle amid unquiet seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though grisly messengers knock on many doors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though there be many storms among your trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all your banners rent with ancient wars;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet such a grace and majesty are yours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There be still some, whose glad heart suffereth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All hate can bring from her misgotten stores,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Telling themselves, so England’s self draw breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That’s all the happiness on this side death.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="over-the-hills-and-hollows-green" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">“Over the Hills and Hollows Green”</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Over the hills and hollows green</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The springtide air goes valiantly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where many sainted singing larks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And blessed primaveras be:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But bitterly the springtide air</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the desert towns doth blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About whose torn and shattered streets</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No more shall children’s footsteps go.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnet</h3>
				<p>
					<span>To-night the world is but a prison house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kindly ways, and all the springing grass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are dungeon stones to him that may not pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among them, save with anguish on his brows:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And any wretched husbandman that ploughs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The upland acres in his habit spare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is king, to those in palaces of glass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who sit with grief and weariness for spouse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O God, who madest first the world that we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might happy live, and praise its pleasantness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such wise as the angels never could,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore are hearts, fashioned so wondrously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All spoiled and changed by human bitterness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the likenesses of stone and wood?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="o-long-the-fiends-of-war-shall-dance" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">“O Long the Fiends of War Shall Dance”</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O long the fiends of war shall dance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the stricken fields of France:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And long and long their grisly cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall echo up and smite the sky:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O long and long the tears of God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall fall upon a barren sod,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save when, of His great clemency,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gives men’s hearts in custody</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of grim old kindly Death, who knows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mould is better than the rose.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="for-r-q-g" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">For R. Q. G.</h3>
				<p>
					<span>July 1916</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O God, whose great inscrutable purposes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Seen only of the one all-seeing eye)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are as unchangeable as the azure sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as fulfilled of infinite mysteries:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are like a fast-locked castle without keys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereof the gates are very strong and high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impenetrable, and we poor fools die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor even know what thing beyond them is:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O God, by whom men’s lives are multiplied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are scattered broadcast in the world like grain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And after long time reaped again and stored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Thou who only canst be glorified</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By man’s own passion and the supreme pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Accept this sacrifice of blood outpoured.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sun-and-shadow-and-winds-of-spring" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">“Sun and Shadow and Winds of Spring”</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Sun and shadow and winds of spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love and laughter and hope and fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cloud and storm-light over the hills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tears and passion and sordid shame:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All, all are but as quenchèd fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vanish’d smoke to him that lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the silence of the trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the silence of the skies.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="let-us-tell-quiet-stories-of-kind-eyes" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">“Let Us Tell Quiet Stories of Kind Eyes”</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Let us tell quiet stories of kind eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And placid brows where peace and learning sate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of misty gardens under evening skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where four would walk of old, with steps sedate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Let’s have no word of all the sweat and blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the noise and strife and dust and smoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(We who have seen Death surging like a flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wave upon wave, that leaped and raced and broke).</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or let’s sit silently, we three together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Around a wide hearth-fire that’s glowing red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Giving no thought to all the stormy weather</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That flies above the roof-tree overhead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he, the fourth, that lies all silently</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In some far-distant and untended grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the shadow of a shattered tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall leave the company of the hapless brave,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And draw nigh unto us for memory’s sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because a look, a word, a deed, a friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are bound with cords that never a man may break,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his heart for ever, until the end.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="save-that-poetic-fire" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">“Save That Poetic Fire”</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Save that poetic fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Burns in the hidden heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save that the full-voiced choir</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sings in a place apart,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Man that’s of woman born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all his imaginings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were less than the dew of morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Less than the least of things.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</section>
		<article id="the-burial-of-sophocles" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Burial of Sophocles</h2>
			<article id="the-first-verses" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The First Verses</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Gather great store of roses, crimson-red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From ancient gardens under summer skies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New opened buds, and some that soon must shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their leaves to earth, that all expectant lies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some from the paths of poets’ wandering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some from the places where young lovers meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some from the seats of dreamers pondering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all most richly red, and honey-sweet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For in the splendour of the afternoon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When sunshine lingers on the glittering town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And glorifies the temples wondrous-hewn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All set about it like a deathless crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We will go mingle with the solemn throng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With neither eyes that weep, nor hearts that bleed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to his grave with slow, majestic song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bears down the latest of the godlike seed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Many a singer lies on distant isle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the canopy of changing sky:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around them waves innumerable smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And o’er their head the restless seabirds cry:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But we will lay him far from sound of seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far from the jutting crags’ unhopeful gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where there blows never wind save summer breeze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And where the growing rose may clasp his tomb.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And thither in the splendid nights of spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When stars in legions over heaven are flung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall come the ancient gods, all wondering</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why he sings not that had so richly sung:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There Heracles with peaceful foot shall press</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The springing herbage, and Hephæstus strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hera and Aphrodite’s loveliness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the great giver of the choric song.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And thither, after weary pilgrimage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From unknown lands beyond the hoary wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall travellers through every coming age</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approach to pluck a blossom from his grave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some in the flush of youth, or in the prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose life is still as heapèd gold to spend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some who have drunk deep of grief and time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who yet linger half-afraid the end.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-interlude" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Interlude</h3>
				<p>
					<span>It was upon a night of spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even the time when first do sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The new-returnèd nightingales;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whenas all hills and woods and dales</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are resonant with melody</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of songs that die not, but shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the latest hour of time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the life of word or rime⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whenas all brooks more softly flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remembering lovers long ago</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That stood upon their banks and vowed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love was with them like a cloud:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came one out of Athens town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a spun robe, with sandals brown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just when the white ship of the moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had first set sail, and many a rune</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was written in the argent stars;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His feet were set towards the hills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because he knew that there the rills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran down like jewels, and fairy cars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Galloped, maybe, among the dells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And airy sprites wove fitful spells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of gossamer and cold moonshine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which do most mistily entwine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever the hills called, and a voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cried: “Soon, maybe, comes thy choice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twixt mortal immortality</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as shall never be again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twixt the most passionate-pleasant pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the quiet, barren joys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That old men prate about to boys.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He wandered many nights and days⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose morns were always crystal clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As lay the world in still amaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enchanted of the springing year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the nights with wakeful eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Watched for another dawn to rise⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till at the last the mountain tops</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Received him, which like giant props</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stand, lest the all-encircling sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fall down, and men be crushed and die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so he reached a curvèd hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereon the hornèd moon did seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her richest radiance to spill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In an inestimable stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like jewels rare of countless price,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or wizard magic turned to ice.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And as he reached the topmost crest of it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! the Olympian majesties did sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a most high and passionless conclave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They ate ambrosia with their deathless lips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever and anon the golden wave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flowed of the drink divine, which only strips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This mortal frame of its mortality.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there, and there was Aphrodite, she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is more lovely than the golden dawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from a ripple of the sea was born:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there was Hera, the imperious queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Dian’s chastity, that hunts unseen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What time with spring the woodland boughs are green:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there was Pan with mirth and pleasantness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Eros’ self that never knew distress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save for the love of the fair Cretan maid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There Hermes with the wings of speed arrayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And awful Zeus, the king of gods and men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever at his feet Apollo sang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A measure of changing harmonies that rang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From that high mountain over all the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the sails of fighting ships were furled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And men drew breath, and there was peace again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But him that saw, the sight like flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or depths of waters overcame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He swooned, nor heard how ceased the choir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of strings upon Apollo’s lyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor saw he how the sweet god stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And smiled on him in kindly mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stooped, and kissed him as he lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then lightly rose and turned away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To join the bright immortal throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make for them another song.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-last-verses" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Last Verses</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O ageless nonpareil of stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shinest through a mist of cloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O light beyond the prison bars</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remote, unwavering, and proud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fortunate star and happy light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye benison the gloom of night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All hail, unfailing eye and hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All hail, all hail, unsilenced voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That makest dead men understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The very dead in graves rejoice:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose utterance, writ in ancient books,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall always live, for him that looks.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Many as leaves from autumn trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The years shall flutter from on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with their multiple decease</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The souls of men shall fall and die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, while the empires turn to dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You shall live on, because you must.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O seven times happy he that dies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After the splendid harvest-tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When strong barns shield from winter skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The grain that’s rightly stored inside:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There death shall scatter no more tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than o’er the falling of the years:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Aye, happy seven times is he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who enters not the silent doors</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before his time, but tenderly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Death beckons unto him, because</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s rest within for weary feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now all the journey is complete.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</article>
		<article id="so-we-lay-down-the-pen" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">“So We Lay Down the Pen”</h2>
			<p>
				<span>So we lay down the pen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So we forbear the building of the rime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bid our hearts be steel for times and a time</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till ends the strife, and then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the New Age is verily begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God grant that we may do the things undone.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
